[Python] Manual instrumentation for Cache Module (#9926)
getsentry/sentry-docs: docs/platforms/python/performance/instrumentation/cache-module.mdx

---

To monitor your caches Sentry provides some auto instrumentation for popular Python caching setups (like <PlatformLink to="/integrations/django/">Django</PlatformLink>, <PlatformLink to="/integrations/redis/">Redis</PlatformLink>, and memcached *(coming soon)*). But in cache you use a custom caching solution that has not auto instrumentatin, you can manually instrument your caching solution to get a look into how your caching solution is performing.

You need to create a span when you put something into the cache and create a second span when you fetch something out of the cache. By adding some additional information to those cache Sentry will show you how your caching system is performing.

Always make sure that there is a transaction running when you create the spans. If you are using a web framework then those transactions are created for you. See <PlatformLink to="/performance/">Performance Monitoring</PlatformLink> for more information.

For detailed information about data that can be set, see the [Cache Module Developer Specification](https://develop.sentry.dev/sdk/performance/modules/cache/).

> ## Manual Instrumentation
> 
> If you use <PlatformLink to="/integrations/django/">Django</PlatformLink>, <PlatformLink to="/integrations/redis/">Redis</PlatformLink>,  memcached *(comming soon)* then you do not need manual instrumentation. See the linked docs on how to enable automatic cache instrumentation.
> 
> If you have caching solution not mentioned above you need to do the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Manual Instrumentation

If you're using anything other than <PlatformLink to="/integrations/django/">Django</PlatformLink>, <PlatformLink to="/integrations/redis/">Redis</PlatformLink>,  memcached (comming soon), you'll need to manually instrument the [Cache Module]((https://sentry.io/orgredirect/organizations/:orgslug/performance/cache/)) by following the steps below.
```

### Initialize Sentry

<PlatformContent includePath="getting-started-config" />

### Add Span When Putting Data Into the Cache:

> If the cache you’re using isn’t supported by Opt-In instrumentation mentioned above, you can use the <PlatformLink to="/performance/instrumentation/custom-instrumentation/">Custom Instrumentation</PlatformLink> instructions below to emit cache spans:

Author: You are right. I wanted to refer to the auto instrumentation mentioned above. And yes, linking out is not necessary!

1. Set the cache value with whatever cache library you happen to be using.
2. Wrap the part of your application that uses the cached value with  `with sentry_sdk.start_span(...)`
3. Set `op` to `cache.set`.
4. Set `cache.item_size` to an integer representing the size of the cached item.

(The steps described above are documented in the snippet.)

```python
import my_caching
import sentry_sdk

key = "myCacheKey123"
value = "The value I want to cache."

with sentry_sdk.start_span(op="cache.set") as span:
    # Set a key in your caching using your custom caching solution
    my_caching.set(key, value)

    # Describe the cache server you are accessing
    span.set_data("network.peer.address", "cache.example.com/supercache")
    span.set_data("network.peer.port", 9000)

    # Add the key you want to set
    span.set_data("cache.key", key)

    # Add the size of the value you stored in the cache
    span.set_data("cache.item_size", len(value))  # Warning: if value is very big this could use lots of memory
```

### Add Span When Retrieving Data From the Cache:

> If the cache you’re using isn’t supported by Opt-In instrumentation mentioned above, you can use the <PlatformLink to="/performance/instrumentation/custom-instrumentation/">Custom Instrumentation</PlatformLink> instructions below to emit cache spans:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the cache you’re using isn’t supported by opt-In instrumentation mentioned above, you can use the <PlatformLink to="/performance/instrumentation/custom-instrumentation/">Custom Instrumentation</PlatformLink> instructions below to emit cache spans:
```
Same two questions as above :)

Author: You are right. I wanted to refer to the auto instrumentation mentioned above. And yes, linking out is not necessary!

3. Set `op` to `cache.get`.
4. Set `cache.hit` to a boolean value representing whether the value was successfully fetched from the cache or not.
5. Set `cache.item_size` to an integer representing the size of the cached item.

(The steps described above are documented in the snippet.)

```python
import my_caching
import sentry_sdk

key = "myCacheKey123"
value = None

with sentry_sdk.start_span(op="cache.get") as span:
    # Get a key from your caching solution
    value = my_caching.get(key)

    # Describe the cache server you are accessing
    span.set_data("network.peer.address", "cache.example.com/supercache")
    span.set_data("network.peer.port", 9000)

    # Add the key you just retrieved from the cache
    span.set_data("cache.key", key)

    if value is not None:
        # If you retrieved a value, the cache was hit
        span.set_data("cache.hit", True)

        # Optionally also add the size of the value you retrieved
        span.set_data("cache.item_size", len(value))
    else
        # If you could not retrieve a value, it was a miss
        span.set_data("cache.hit", False)
```

> That's it. If you have those spans in place head over to `Performance > Cache` on [Sentry.io](https://sentry.io) to see how your cache is doing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should now have the right spans in place. Head over to [Cache dashboard](https://sentry.io/orgredirect/organizations/:orgslug/performance/cache/) to see how your cache is performing.
```
